Atomic Tango

Motivation: Students of tango (especially leaders) seem to face
a daunting task of learning countless sequences.
Most teachers feed into this idea by building classes
around one or more sequences. The net result is that
one has to take an indefinite number of classes and then
one has the hope of understanding the whole by osmosis.

We want to speed this process up by breaking things down.
In this we are inspired by our teacher Tomas Corbalan.
We call this atomic tango.

Atomic tango breaks down each sequence into individual moves
such as weight change, rotation, extension part of a forward step,
extension part of a side step,
volcada, colcada, boleo etc.
The idea is that each move transforms the couple from one
state to another.
There aren't too many constraints, the main one being that
the follower can't hop, e.g. move from her left foot to a different
position on her left foot directly (though she could
be lifted).

The key idea is how to define a state.
Here we give the basic parameters of a state described as a set
of discrete values. Of course the dance is continuous, so individuals
may interpret this in different ways.

state consists of eight parameters but the first seven are crucial

i) position of woman relative to man: north, northwest, northeast, etc
Comment: north is in front of man, south is behind the man etc.

ii) facing relative to man: (towards, away, clockwise, counterclockwise)
Comment: towards mean the woman is facing the man; clockwise means that
if the man is the center of a clock and she is the second hand then she
is facing in the direction of movement of the second hand.

iii) weighted foot: none/left/right
Comment: which foot of the woman has weight. None means a lift.

iv) unweighted foot: collected/crossed left forward/crossed right forward/forward/backward/in air forward/in air back/slid out
Comment: the unweighted foot could be collected, in a cross position
(either in front or back) etc.


v) leaning: neutral/away/towards
Comment: is the woman vertical or leaning either towards or away
from the man.

vi) foot contact: none/manfoot_inside_femalefoot/manfoot_outside_femalefoot
Comment: is the man's foot touching the woman's foot and if so
which foot in both cases and is the foot on the outside or inside.
This captures all paradas.

vii) thigh contact:none/leg man back to leg woman  back /leg man front to leg woman  back /leg man back to leg woman  front

Comment: ganchos can be lower thigh to lower thigh, upper thigh
to lower thigh etc. Only one that isn't possible is upper to upper.

viii) height: high/low

Comment: Is the couple very low, very high (e.g. for milonga), or
normal.

How does this help? Well think of each move as a transformation
and then we can ask which moves are possible in each state.

sidestep(rightleft):
  precondition: woman either facing towards or away
  she must be collected
  move in direction of unweighted foot
  state change: a foot extends

rotate(direction (clockwise or counterclockwise))
  precondition: []
  rotate
  only the facing parameter changes

gancho(direction (clockwise or counterclockwise), loworup)
  if facing towards and woman on the right foot and clockwise direction
  and loworup == up
   then this is a classic
     woman's left leg wrap around the man's right leg.
  if facing towards and woman on the right foot and clockwise direction
  and loworup == down
  ` then man must lift his leg to allow woman to come in
        possible but unusual
  if facing towards and woman on the left foot and clockwise direction
  and loworup == up
    then this is a roundhouse kick basically
  --- symmetrically for the left foot and facing towards
  --- symmetrically for facing away

gancho(direction)
  perform the rotation and


If all we want to know is which sequences are possible, then we don't
need to know the couple position.
Right forward entrada for example rotates the couple but at the end
of the move, she's facing him and she is on her right foot while he is too.
So we do need to know which foot the leader is on to know which foot is next.

move(initialstate, finalstate)


For a gancho to be possible the female leg must be off weight before the gancho
and it must be possible to get to the destination just by rotation or lift.

What can one do from a cross: rotate, forward step, back kick

kicks can be forward or back



gancho:

initial:
position: southwest
facing: away
weighted foot: right
unweighted foot: collected
leaning: neutral
foot contact: man right outside female left
thigh contact: none:


final:
position: southwest
facing: away
weighted foot: right
unweighted foot: collected
leaning: neutral
foot contact: man right outside female left
thigh contact: left man back to left woman back



possible to do a left male leg over left female leg.

drag can be either direction.

backcross

parada


volcado: facing, right foot, to cross.

leader weight change

rotate clockwise only works if she is on her left foot.

forward outside step

rotate counterclockwise

dip

kick: she is east, clockwise, on left leg, kick is of the right foot.

left leg to right leg goncho

right leg to right leg goncho while perpendicular

left leg to left leg goncho while facing away

right leg to left leg goncho

sequence: face east, forward step to right foot, rotate
clockwise to face then side step to left foot, rotate clockwise
so facing away on right foot, rotate counterclockwise to face.




wrapping gancho

leg caress

northwest right foot to left foot east lift

east right foot to center west-facing lift (perhaps with steps)

east counterclockwise- left foot to right leg to left hip goncho.

arm spin -- just a rotation using the arm.

back kick or front kick -- must be facing east or west. Usually with the
inside leg.

left foot drag -- right foot is placed and this one pushed one way or the other. End
position is facing or is east

colgada: right foot to right foot she is east and counterclockwise.
Could we do left side to left foot.

entrada: north, clockwise, right foot forward, so we entrada between her legs
or north, counterclockwise, left foot forward, entrada between her legs

front boleo

forward step


ocho cortado:
Bring follower to a cross when she's on her right leg with her legs
separated. The move is a counterclockwise twist.

Then how do we model a sacada and an entrada?
She's got to have her legs separated and leader puts either a forward or
back leg between her legs.
Whole couple rotates.

sidestep: shift weight
couple position shifts to leg that will be final destination.

I guess though the point is what happens to the woman -- in the case of
the colgada, she goes out a bit with her outside foot.

For an entrada, she is just rotating.

For a sacada, she does a
rotation, but the whole couple rotates.
How do we model that?
